The Joe Rogan experience,
where you were talking about the changes in human diet and eating soft foods and
how it affects the way the jaw develops and the,
the size of the jaw. And that there's a way to improve that,
which I found fascinating.
Yeah. And th this was something,
when you set out to write a book about breathing,
the last thing you think you're going to be doing is handing around a bunch of
ancient skulls and looking at teeth. But, but that's where this journey led me.
I had heard from some biological anthropologist that our faces have
changed and that our mouths have gotten too small.
And that was one of the reasons so many of us were breathing so poorly.
And so I thought, well, this sounds interesting. These people are legit.
I want to check it out. And if you take an ancient skull,
anything older than 500 years old, 5,000 years old, 50,000 years old,
you're going to see by and large, about 99% chance.
These skulls are going to have perfectly straight to you.
They never had their wisdom, teeth removed. They never had braces,
any orthodonture, anything.
They had straight teeth because they had these very wide and large mouth.
And these powerful jaws.
If you start getting into the modern era of industrialized food mouths start
shrinking. So why do we have crooked teeth? Not from genetics.
It's because our mouse have grown so small that the teeth have nowhere to go.
So the grow crooked and what else happens when you have a mouth that's too small
for its teeth, you have a smaller airway.
So this is one of the reasons why so many people have snoring and sleep apnea
and other respiratory problems.
This sounded so bizarre because it's nothing I'd ever learned in school.
But all anyone needs to do is look up some ancient skulls.
If you're online and check out their teeth and check out how they have these
huge jaws, these big flat wide faces, powerful faces,
and they all had this.
And then you go into the wild 5,400 different mammals and check out and see how
many have crooked teeth. The answer is zero. So some,
some bulldogs do, because they've been bred to have this flat face,
just like humans, but, but animals in the wild have straight teeth.
And, and we did too, as a species, we have straight teeth. But,
um, but because of industrialization specifically, because of food,
our mouths have grown too small.
Yeah. You would never believe that. Like,
if someone told me that other than reading your book and kind of understanding
where you're, where you're coming from, I would think that this is nonsense.
It's genetics.
He's like why people have small hands or people have big feet or what?
Well, it's become a heritable trait. So,
so what's happened now is they've found the researchers who who've,
who've done this rubber core Cine worked on this stuff for 30 years is 250
scientific papers on it.
They found within the first generation of switching to industrialized foods,
about 50% of the population is going to have malocclusion,
which means a crooked jaw crooked teeth after that 60 to 70%
next generation, after that, about 80%, after that look around,
that's us now about 90%. Jesus. So if, if, sorry,
no, I was going to put me off. So, so there, uh,
Dr. Kevin Boyd is now doing studies where he's looking at fetuses in the womb
and is seen their mouth size is too small.
And they have this backward slant to their faces.
Just like I have just like so many people in the population have,
if you were to measure a skull and you were to draw one line from its ear
to its nose and another line perpendicular to that,
almost every single ancient skull would be above that line.
Very powerful jaw. Now 90% of modern skulls are below it.
So they are behind it. So, and this is happening now.
It is becoming a heritable trait. So, so kids are messed up too,
to begin with, which is why so many kids are, have sleep apnea and snore now,
which is so injurious to their, to their health.
And this came about because they weren't chewing tougher food.
They didn't need the muscles and w what can be done to sort of reverse that.
And adulthood it's harder. And, and for kids,
it's much easier because their muscles are,
and their bones are much more malleable,
but that's exactly what they found is once you introduce,
we used to chew for about four hours a day. Okay.
That that's just how it was from the Dawn of time to, to about 500 years ago.
But as wheat started getting processed in a white flour,
as rice became, we started taking the, the German, the brand away from rice.
So it's just the Polish seed.
As things began to get canned and bottled.
If you think about even what's considered healthy food right now, smoothies,
avocado, oatmeal, all of this stuff has so much power bars,
right? So in adulthood there, you can make some changes.
And that's what I tried to do in my own face as, as a, uh, experiment,
uh, for kids,
what they're finding is these problems need to be diagnosed very early and they
need to be treated.
And what they do is they widen the mouth to the way that they were supposed to
be 500 years ago. So we're changing our bodies by,
by force of will,
to the way that the nature had made them before we messed them up.
Well, it was,
there was a doctor that you were talking about that developed some sort of a
retainer that actually changed the volume of your jaw as an adult and changed
the volume of your.
That's. Right? So, um, I had crooked teeth growing up. I had braces,
I had extractions, I had gear and me and everyone, I knew had the same thing.
It was never, if you were going to get it, it's just,
when are you going to get your braces? Right?
So the point of all those things was to straightened teeth,
but they're not looking at airway health, right? So,
so what happens just as a principal,
you've got a mouth that's too small for its face.
The teeth are growing and crooked. You extract teeth from that,
get some headgear and go, you're creating.
At least there's a significant argument by many people in the field that say
you're making a small mouth smaller, and one leader in the field,
Dr. Michael Galvin said 50% of people who have orthodontics are going to, um,
have more breathing problems because of it. Orthodontics,
meaning braces as well. Brit braces are craning in.
So it's combination of braces and especially headgear.
And some of that stuff is being phased out. Braces are still,
you're forcing teeth into a smaller space to,
to make them to make them straight.
So there's this the very first orthodontics weren't craning teeth
in to make them straight.
They would expand the mouth because even back then 120 years ago,
they knew our mouths were growing too small. They knew that.
So the first devices, I thought this was fascinating.
They were using this for kids who had cleft.
Palates had all of these other problems,
where they were having problem with chewing and breathing.
So they would expand their mouths with this device that went to the roof of your
mouth. And it had a little dowel screw.
And you slowly opened it up to expand the mouth. What does it feel like?
Um, it doesn't feel great. So, uh,
th this is where I think a lot of orthodontics is heading because it allows you
to have straighter teeth, but it also opens your airway.
How long do you keep it in your, you keep it in your mouth,
like braces all day long?
No, no. The,
the one that I use was called a homeo block and this guy had been using it for
30 years and I used it at night.
So you put it on the pallet, upper palate, and you, you slow, you have this,
this little screw thing,
this little handle that every couple of weeks you open it a little more slowly.
There it is. Jamie's got a picture of it. All right.
So if you feel that you used one of those, yeah, I did not. None,
none as gnarly as that. Um, this looks intense, but, uh,
if you feel your head right now, you feel these sutures, right? These,
these cracks in your head, you have one of those on your upper palate,
so that can open. Okay. Uh, that's, that's what it's made to do.
It can open and you can widen your mouth and adulthood.
And I showed this through, through cat scans.
And by that you can open your airway and you can breathe better.
And how long did you wear it for? I worked for one year, one year,
two to the week. I took the other cat scan.
And you gained how much volume in your mouth?
I gained about five pennies worth of bone in my face,
which is crazy.
So stack them up.
Yeah. Five pennies. Yeah. So it's a lot of bone, man. So.
Then we've been told that we can't grow bone past 30, right?
It's just entropy. We're only going to be losing. We can,
we can stop it from disappearing.
We can do some things to help prevent that loss, but we can't build it,
but we can, we can build it in the center of our face, in the.
So you can really change the structure of your face from doing that.
You could widen your face.
You can add more bone, you can model more bone inside of you. Yeah. You.
Look better. You think you're going to tell you good looking, man. But I mean,
do you think you look.
Better? I, I will not say better. I won't use those. No worse,
worse people be before warned. Don't build bone in your face.
Now I did notice after, after about six weeks of wearing this thing,
people were like, yeah, what happened? What are you.
Doing? They could see a shift.
Absolutely. And it's, and it's, it's very apparent. And there's,
you can see a bunch of case studies on this and you can see it for yourself.
And the neat thing is it's not subjective. It's not, well,
I think I look different. There's cat scans and there's metrics to it. So, yeah.
So, and it also opened my airways. It, it allowed me to expand,
I don't know how much is probably maybe 15%, 20%,
but it was mostly the toning of the airway.
Why did you stop using it after a year? I'm still using it. You are. So I,
for the book, for the research, I said,
I'm going to do this for one year and I'm going to wear it every night. Um,
I'm really going to be dedicated even after having a few, few beers,
it was like,
the last thing I want to do is put this thing in my mouth and go to sleep.
But I did it, uh, because I was curious, cause I'd heard these stories.
I'd seen the case. Studies I'd see the data,
but I wanted to see what would happen in my, in my own body. And, um,
I tell you on a subjective level, I breathe more easily now than,
than I can ever remember breathing. I haven't had pneumonia and bronchitis,
any of those, but.
There's a bunch of factors though, too, right? There's the nose breathing.
There's the breath work. So it's a combination of all these.
Things, but nose breathing wouldn't help you build more,
more bone in your course. So a lot of that was due to this device.
Not only spread open that suture in the upper palate,
but also stimulated chewing stress.
So on one side there was this little bump. So every time you closed your mouth,
you got some chewing stress which would stimulate stem cells,
which would go into those sutures and build more bone. The differences. When,
when you clench your jaws right now, just like, you know, you're boxing,
you're intense, you're clenching your jaws. That does not stimulate that,
that good, beneficial, chewing stress. Okay?
Because our bodies identify that as sympathetic stress of cortisol levels go up,
right? That means growth. Isn't going to happen.
But if you think about eating a big piece of steak or a carrot,
you're not chewing on both sides of your molars,
you're chewing on one side or the other.
So when you stimulate the stress on one side or the other, you're,
if you next time you're chewing on something,
think about that. That's why you salivate and,
and you become more relaxed. And that's when that growth can happen.
So chewing on one side or the other stimulates stem cells that don't get
stimulated.
If you just like biting down on a mouthpiece because of cortisol and osteopaths.
Yeah. Yeah. Now how often do you have this thing in your mouth? Now?
I took a break after a year to see what life was like on the other side of that.
So nice. That's great. But, but I got curious,
I talked to the guy who gave me this device, Dr. Ted Belfour and he's,
he's used this thing for 30 years. And in his case,
studies are pretty fascinating. Um, and I talked to him, he's like, oh,
we should do another cat scan. See what happened?
I didn't quite admit to him that I had stopped using it.
So I felt a little guilty. And now for the past,
about month and a half of up and back on the back on the train to see what
happens. So we're going to take another one just for, for kicks.
I'm not going to write about the book's already done, but I just,
I'm curious to see what will happen if you keep wearing this.
If you can really keep improving it.
Swami, Rama of orthodontics.
If you get to hold that bad boy in your mouth for a few years, I mean,
that'd be really fascinating if you change your face.
And all of a sudden you have like this big Clark Kent Superman type jaw,
can you.
Let me shack up here for a couple of years?
And I'm just going to focus on this all day. Just.
Stay in the it to go do what you gotta do. Okay.